Micronaut + MySQL on AWS guide (#798)
micronaut-projects/micronaut-guides: guides/micronaut-cloud-database-aws/micronaut-cloud-database-aws.adoc

external:micronaut-cloud-database-base/start.adoc[]
* An https://aws.amazon.com/[AWS account] with:
** An IAM user with enough permissions to create and manage DB instances in RDS.
** The AWS CLI configured to use the IAM user above.
* The https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/mysql.html[MySQL client CLI].

common:aws.adoc[]

== Creating a MySQL Database instance in Amazon Relational Database Service (Amazon RDS)

We will create the database with the AWS CLI. See the https://awscli.amazonaws.com/v2/documentation/api/latest/reference/rds/index.html[AWS CLI `rds` command] for more information.

=== Create VPC, security group, subnets and subnet group (optional)

To allow connections to the database from your local computer, we will create a VPC and a security group that allows access to the MySQL default port from your current public IP address.

WARNING: Exposing a database port to the internet is a security risk. This should only be done for development purposes.

We will also create 2 subnets in different availability zones, and a subnet group to associate them.

[source,bash]
----
# VPC, internet gateway and route table

> export VPC_ID=$(aws ec2 create-vpc --cidr-block 10.0.0.0/16 | jq -r '.Vpc.VpcId')

Reviewer: Should we add a link to jq?  https://stedolan.github.io/jq/

Reviewer: it is not install by default in MacOS for example.

Reviewer: Resolved via https://github.com/micronaut-projects/micronaut-guides/pull/798/commits/8c9e6c5566531e158b7e0fed33e826ad84011659

aws rds create-db-subnet-group --db-subnet-group-name micronaut-guides-mysql-sng --db-subnet-group-description "DB subnet group for the Micronaut MySQL guide" --subnet-ids "$SN0_ID" "$SN1_ID"
----

=== Create the MySQL instance

[source,bash]
----
aws rds create-db-instance \
    --db-instance-identifier micronaut-guides-mysql \
    --db-instance-class db.t2.micro \
    --engine mysql \
    --master-username admin \
    --master-user-password secret99 \
    --allocated-storage 20 \
    --db-subnet-group-name micronaut-guides-mysql-sng \
    --vpc-security-group-ids $SG_ID \
    --publicly-accessible
----

You then need to wait for the instance to be available:

[source,bash]
----
aws rds wait db-instance-available --db-instance-identifier micronaut-guides-mysql
----

Once available, you can configure environment variables for its hostname and port:

[source,bash]
----
export MYSQL_HOST=$(aws rds describe-db-instances --query 'DBInstances[?DBInstanceIdentifier==`micronaut-guides-mysql`].Endpoint.Address' --output text)
----

Finally, test connectivity to the database using the MySQL client CLI:

[source,bash]
----

> mysql -u admin -psecret99

Reviewer 2: instead of specifying the password from the command (which leaves the password in `~/.bash_history` or equivalent) have them run `mysql -u admin -p` and enter the password when prompted

Author: Makes sense. I wanted to deliver as much copy/paste-able content as possible, but this instance should be different

external:micronaut-cloud-database-base/start.adoc[]
* An https://aws.amazon.com/[AWS account] with:
** An IAM user with enough permissions to create and manage DB instances in RDS.
** The AWS CLI configured to use the IAM user above.
* The https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/mysql.html[MySQL client CLI].

common:aws.adoc[]

== Creating a MySQL Database instance in Amazon Relational Database Service (Amazon RDS)

> We will create the database with the AWS CLI. See the https://awscli.amazonaws.com/v2/documentation/api/latest/reference/rds/index.html[AWS CLI `rds` command] for more information.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You will create the database with the AWS CLI. See the https://awscli.amazonaws.com/v2/documentation/api/latest/reference/rds/index.html[AWS CLI `rds` command] for more information.
```

=== Create VPC, security group, subnets and subnet group (optional)

> To allow connections to the database from your local computer, we will create a VPC and a security group that allows access to the MySQL default port from your current public IP address.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To allow connections to the database from your local computer, create a VPC and a security group that allows access to the MySQL default port from your current public IP address.
```

> WARNING: Exposing a database port to the internet is a security risk. This should only be done for development purposes.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
WARNING: Exposing a database port to the internet is a security risk. This should be done only for development purposes.
```

> We will also create 2 subnets in different availability zones, and a subnet group to associate them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You will also create 2 subnets in different availability zones and a subnet group to associate them.
```

export SN1_ID=$(aws ec2 create-subnet --vpc-id $VPC_ID --cidr-block 10.0.16.0/20 --availability-zone $AZ_1 | jq -r '.Subnet.SubnetId')
aws ec2 modify-subnet-attribute --subnet-id $SN0_ID --map-public-ip-on-launch
aws ec2 modify-subnet-attribute --subnet-id $SN1_ID --map-public-ip-on-launch
aws rds create-db-subnet-group --db-subnet-group-name micronaut-guides-mysql-sng --db-subnet-group-description "DB subnet group for the Micronaut MySQL guide" --subnet-ids "$SN0_ID" "$SN1_ID"
----

=== Create the MySQL instance

[source,bash]
----
aws rds create-db-instance \
    --db-instance-identifier micronaut-guides-mysql \
    --db-instance-class db.t2.micro \
    --engine mysql \
    --master-username admin \
    --master-user-password secret99 \
    --allocated-storage 20 \
    --db-subnet-group-name micronaut-guides-mysql-sng \
    --vpc-security-group-ids $SG_ID \
    --publicly-accessible
----

You then need to wait for the instance to be available:

[source,bash]
----
aws rds wait db-instance-available --db-instance-identifier micronaut-guides-mysql
----

> Once available, you can configure environment variables for its hostname and port:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once the instance is available, you can configure environment variables for its hostname and port:
```

[source,bash]
----
export MYSQL_HOST=$(aws rds describe-db-instances --query 'DBInstances[?DBInstanceIdentifier==`micronaut-guides-mysql`].Endpoint.Address' --output text)
----

Finally, test connectivity to the database using the MySQL client CLI:

[source,bash]
----
mysql -u admin -p
----

=== Create a database and user

> Create the database (use any valid database name, e.g. `micronaut`):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Create the database. You can use any valid database name (e.g., `micronaut`):
```

[source,mysql]
----
mysql> CREATE DATABASE micronaut;
----

> Create a database user (use any valid MySQL username, e.g. `guide_user`, and a valid password):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Create a database user. You can use any valid MySQL username (e.g., `guide_user`) and any valid password:
```

[source,mysql]
----
mysql> CREATE USER 'guide_user' IDENTIFIED BY 'M1cr0n4ut!';
----

Grant access to the database for the new user:

[source,mysql]
----
mysql> GRANT ALL ON micronaut.* TO 'guide_user';
----

Exit the MySQL console:

[source,mysql]
----
mysql> exit
----

external:micronaut-cloud-database-base/create-app.adoc[]

== Running the Application

> With almost everything in place, we can start the application and try it out. First, we need to set environment variables to configure the application datasource. Then we can start the app.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With almost everything in place, you can start the application and try it out. First, set environment variables to configure the application datasource. Then you can start the app.
```

Create environment variables for `JDBC_URL`, `JDBC_USER`, and `JDBC_PASSWORD`, which will be used in the Micronaut app's `application.yml` datasource:

[source,bash]
----
export JDBC_URL=jdbc:mysql://${MYSQL_HOST}:3306/micronaut
export JDBC_USER=guide_user
export JDBC_PASSWORD=M1cr0n4ut!
----

[NOTE]
.Window System
====
Command Prompt:: Change '*export*' to '*set*'
+
Example: `set JDBC_USER=guide_user`

PowerShell:: Change '*export* ' to '*$*' and use quotes around the value
+
Example: `$JDBC_USER="guide_user"`
====

common:runapp-instructions.adoc[]

You can test the application in a web browser or with cURL.

Run from a terminal window to create a `Genre`:

[source, bash]
----
curl -X "POST" "http://localhost:8080/genres" \
     -H 'Content-Type: application/json; charset=utf-8' \
     -d $'{ "name": "music" }'
----

and run this to list the genres:

[source, bash]
----
curl http://localhost:8080/genres/list
----

=== Stopping the Instance and cleaning up

> Once you are done with this guide, you can stop/delete the AWS resources created, to avoid incurring in unnecessary charges.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Once you are done with this guide, you can stop/delete the AWS resources created to avoid incurring unnecessary charges.
```
